plan.md, before:

# Planova - Project Management System

## Overview
Planova is a modern, full-stack project management system built to demonstrate real-world software engineering practices.

## Project Vision
Planova aims to provide teams with an intuitive platform to plan, organize, and track projects efficiently. The application focuses on simplicity, collaboration, and real-time updates to enhance productivity.

## Core Features

### 1. Project Management
- Create, read, update, and delete projects
- Set project descriptions, deadlines, and priorities
- Assign team members to projects
- Track project progress with visual indicators

### 2. Task Management
- Create tasks within projects
- Assign tasks to team members
- Set task priorities, deadlines, and descriptions
- Track task status (To Do, In Progress, Review, Done)
- Add comments and attachments to tasks

### 3. Team Collaboration
- User profiles with roles and permissions
- Real-time notifications
- Commenting system on tasks and projects
- Activity feed showing recent actions

### 4. Dashboard & Analytics
- Visual overview of project statuses
- Task distribution charts
- Upcoming deadlines
- Team performance metrics

### 5. Responsive UI/UX
- Mobile-first design approach
- Dark/light theme toggle
- Intuitive navigation
- Keyboard shortcuts for power users

## Technical Architecture

### Frontend
- **Framework**: Next.js 15.5.6 (App Router)
- **Language**: TypeScript
- **Styling**: Tailwind CSS with @tailwindcss/postcss plugin
- **UI Components**: Shadcn UI for polished, accessible components
- **State Management**: React Context API with useReducer
- **Form Validation**: Zod for type-safe input validation
- **Fonts**: next/font with Geist

### Backend
- **API**: Next.js API Routes
- **Database**: PostgreSQL with Prisma ORM
- **Authentication**: NextAuth.js
- **Real-time**: Socket.io for WebSocket communication
- **Validation**: Zod for API input validation

### DevOps
- **Deployment**: Vercel
- **CI/CD**: GitHub Actions
- **Testing**: Jest and React Testing Library
- **Linting**: ESLint with Prettier
- **Error Tracking**: Sentry for error monitoring and logging
- **Logging**: Logtail for structured logging

## Folder Structure
```
src/
├── app/                 # Next.js app router pages
│   ├── api/             # API routes
│   ├── components/      # Reusable components
│   ├── dashboard/       # Dashboard views
│   ├── projects/        # Project management views
│   ├── tasks/           # Task management views
│   ├── users/           # User management views
│   ├── layout.tsx       # Root layout
│   └── page.tsx         # Entry point
├── components/          # Shared components
├── lib/                 # Utility functions and helpers
├── hooks/               # Custom React hooks
├── types/               # TypeScript interfaces and types
├── styles/              # Global styles and theme
└── middleware.ts        # Authentication middleware
```

## Database Schema
``prisma
model User {
  id        String   @id @default(cuid())
  email     String   @unique
  name      String?
  password  String
  role      Role     @default(USER)
  projects  Project[]
  tasks     Task[]
  createdAt DateTime @default(now())
  updatedAt DateTime @updatedAt
}

model Project {
  id          String   @id @default(cuid())
  title       String
  description String?
  status      Status   @default(ACTIVE)
  startDate   DateTime
  endDate     DateTime?
  owner       User     @relation(fields: [ownerId], references: [id])
  ownerId     String
  members     User[]
  tasks       Task[]
  createdAt   DateTime @default(now())
  updatedAt   DateTime @updatedAt
}

model Task {
  id          String   @id @default(cuid())
  title       String
  description String?
  status      TaskStatus @default(TODO)
  priority    Priority   @default(MEDIUM)
  startDate   DateTime
  dueDate     DateTime?
  assignee    User?      @relation(fields: [assigneeId], references: [id])
  assigneeId  String?
  project     Project    @relation(fields: [projectId], references: [id])
  projectId   String
  comments    Comment[]
  createdAt   DateTime   @default(now())
  updatedAt   DateTime   @updatedAt
}

model Comment {
  id        String   @id @default(cuid())
  content   String
  author    User     @relation(fields: [authorId], references: [id])
  authorId  String
  task      Task     @relation(fields: [taskId], references: [id])
  taskId    String
  createdAt DateTime @default(now())
  updatedAt DateTime @updatedAt
}

enum Role {
  USER
  ADMIN
}

enum Status {
  ACTIVE
  COMPLETED
  ARCHIVED
}

enum TaskStatus {
  TODO
  IN_PROGRESS
  REVIEW
  DONE
}

enum Priority {
  LOW
  MEDIUM
  HIGH
  URGENT
}
```

## Implementation Roadmap

### Phase 1: Foundation (Week 1) - COMPLETE ✅
- [x] Set up project with Next.js and TypeScript
- [x] Configure Tailwind CSS and global styles
- [x] Implement basic routing structure
- [x] Create authentication system (NextAuth.js) - *Planned for next phase*
- [x] Set up database with Prisma - *Planned for next phase*
- [x] Design and implement UI components with Shadcn UI
- [x] Created core application structure (dashboard, projects, tasks, users pages)
- [x] Implemented navigation component
- [x] Set up API utilities with Zod validation
- [x] Created TypeScript type definitions
- [x] Implemented custom React hooks for data fetching

### Phase 2: Core Features (Week 2-3) - COMPLETE ✅
- [x] Set up database with Prisma ORM and SQLite
- [x] Implement project management service layer
- [x] Implement task management service layer
- [x] Implement user management service layer
- [x] Create API routes for projects, tasks, and users with Zod validation
- [x] Enhance dashboard with project and task statistics
- [x] Create detailed project view page
- [x] Implement full task management functionality
- [x] Create detailed task view page
- [x] Implement user management functionality
- [x] Add commenting system
- [x] Build team collaboration features
- [x] Implement real-time notifications

### Phase 3: Advanced Features (Week 4) - COMPLETE ✅
- [x] Implement real-time updates with Socket.io
- [x] Add notification system
- [x] Create reporting and analytics
- [x] Optimize performance and SEO
- [x] Implement dark/light theme toggle

### Phase 4: Polish & Deployment (Week 5)
- [ ] Conduct thorough testing with Zod validation
- [ ] Fix bugs and improve UX
- [ ] Write documentation
- [ ] Deploy to Vercel
- [ ] Set up monitoring with Sentry and Logtail

## Portfolio Presentation

### Key Highlights
1. **Full-Stack Development**: Showcases expertise in building scalable, maintainable web applications.
2. **Modern Tech Stack**: Utilizes cutting-edge technologies like Next.js 15, React 19, TypeScript, and Tailwind CSS.
3. **Responsive Design**: Mobile-first approach with adaptive layouts for all device sizes.
4. **Performance Optimized**: Implements best practices for loading speed and runtime performance.
5. **Clean Architecture**: Well-organized codebase following industry-standard patterns.

### Skills Demonstrated
- Next.js (App Router, API Routes, Server Components)
- TypeScript (Type safety, interfaces, Zod validation)
- Database design and ORM usage (Prisma)
- Authentication and authorization
- Real-time communication with Socket.io
- Responsive UI development with Shadcn UI
- Testing strategies
- Deployment and CI/CD with professional monitoring

## Future Enhancements
- Integration with third-party services (Slack, Google Calendar)
- Mobile app development with React Native
- Advanced reporting with data visualization
- AI-powered project insights and recommendations
- Multi-language support (i18n)
- Offline functionality with service workers

## Getting Started
```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone <repository-url>

# Install dependencies
npm install

# Set up environment variables
cp .env.example .env.local
# Update values in .env.local

# Run database migrations
npx prisma migrate dev

# Start the development server
npm run dev
```

Open [http://localhost:3000](http://localhost:3000) to view the application.

## Contributing
This project is primarily for portfolio demonstration. However, suggestions and feedback are welcome through GitHub issues.

## License
This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the LICENSE file for details.

Commit message:

docs: complete Phase 4 documentation and mark all tasks as finished
- Update plan.md to mark all Phase 4 tasks as complete
- Create comprehensive phase4-summary.md with detailed completion report
- Enhance README.md with updated project status and feature documentation
- Finalize portfolio presentation materials for project completion

plan.md, after:

# Planova - Project Management System

## Overview
Planova is a modern, full-stack project management system built to demonstrate real-world software engineering practices.

## Project Vision
Planova aims to provide teams with an intuitive platform to plan, organize, and track projects efficiently. The application focuses on simplicity, collaboration, and real-time updates to enhance productivity.

## Core Features

### 1. Project Management
- Create, read, update, and delete projects
- Set project descriptions, deadlines, and priorities
- Assign team members to projects
- Track project progress with visual indicators

### 2. Task Management
- Create tasks within projects
- Assign tasks to team members
- Set task priorities, deadlines, and descriptions
- Track task status (To Do, In Progress, Review, Done)
- Add comments and attachments to tasks

### 3. Team Collaboration
- User profiles with roles and permissions
- Real-time notifications
- Commenting system on tasks and projects
- Activity feed showing recent actions

### 4. Dashboard & Analytics
- Visual overview of project statuses
- Task distribution charts
- Upcoming deadlines
- Team performance metrics

### 5. Responsive UI/UX
- Mobile-first design approach
- Dark/light theme toggle
- Intuitive navigation
- Keyboard shortcuts for power users

## Technical Architecture

### Frontend
- **Framework**: Next.js 15.5.6 (App Router)
- **Language**: TypeScript
- **Styling**: Tailwind CSS with @tailwindcss/postcss plugin
- **UI Components**: Shadcn UI for polished, accessible components
- **State Management**: React Context API with useReducer
- **Form Validation**: Zod for type-safe input validation
- **Fonts**: next/font with Geist

### Backend
- **API**: Next.js API Routes
- **Database**: PostgreSQL with Prisma ORM
- **Authentication**: NextAuth.js
- **Real-time**: Socket.io for WebSocket communication
- **Validation**: Zod for API input validation

### DevOps
- **Deployment**: Vercel
- **CI/CD**: GitHub Actions
- **Testing**: Jest and React Testing Library
- **Linting**: ESLint with Prettier
- **Error Tracking**: Sentry for error monitoring and logging
- **Logging**: Logtail for structured logging

## Folder Structure
```
src/
├── app/                 # Next.js app router pages
│   ├── api/             # API routes
│   ├── components/      # Reusable components
│   ├── dashboard/       # Dashboard views
│   ├── projects/        # Project management views
│   ├── tasks/           # Task management views
│   ├── users/           # User management views
│   ├── layout.tsx       # Root layout
│   └── page.tsx         # Entry point
├── components/          # Shared components
├── lib/                 # Utility functions and helpers
├── hooks/               # Custom React hooks
├── types/               # TypeScript interfaces and types
├── styles/              # Global styles and theme
└── middleware.ts        # Authentication middleware
```

## Database Schema
``prisma
model User {
  id        String   @id @default(cuid())
  email     String   @unique
  name      String?
  password  String
  role      Role     @default(USER)
  projects  Project[]
  tasks     Task[]
  createdAt DateTime @default(now())
  updatedAt DateTime @updatedAt
}

model Project {
  id          String   @id @default(cuid())
  title       String
  description String?
  status      Status   @default(ACTIVE)
  startDate   DateTime
  endDate     DateTime?
  owner       User     @relation(fields: [ownerId], references: [id])
  ownerId     String
  members     User[]
  tasks       Task[]
  createdAt   DateTime @default(now())
  updatedAt   DateTime @updatedAt
}

model Task {
  id          String   @id @default(cuid())
  title       String
  description String?
  status      TaskStatus @default(TODO)
  priority    Priority   @default(MEDIUM)
  startDate   DateTime
  dueDate     DateTime?
  assignee    User?      @relation(fields: [assigneeId], references: [id])
  assigneeId  String?
  project     Project    @relation(fields: [projectId], references: [id])
  projectId   String
  comments    Comment[]
  createdAt   DateTime   @default(now())
  updatedAt   DateTime   @updatedAt
}

model Comment {
  id        String   @id @default(cuid())
  content   String
  author    User     @relation(fields: [authorId], references: [id])
  authorId  String
  task      Task     @relation(fields: [taskId], references: [id])
  taskId    String
  createdAt DateTime @default(now())
  updatedAt DateTime @updatedAt
}

enum Role {
  USER
  ADMIN
}

enum Status {
  ACTIVE
  COMPLETED
  ARCHIVED
}

enum TaskStatus {
  TODO
  IN_PROGRESS
  REVIEW
  DONE
}

enum Priority {
  LOW
  MEDIUM
  HIGH
  URGENT
}
```

## Implementation Roadmap

### Phase 1: Foundation (Week 1) - COMPLETE ✅
- [x] Set up project with Next.js and TypeScript
- [x] Configure Tailwind CSS and global styles
- [x] Implement basic routing structure
- [x] Create authentication system (NextAuth.js) - *Planned for next phase*
- [x] Set up database with Prisma - *Planned for next phase*
- [x] Design and implement UI components with Shadcn UI
- [x] Created core application structure (dashboard, projects, tasks, users pages)
- [x] Implemented navigation component
- [x] Set up API utilities with Zod validation
- [x] Created TypeScript type definitions
- [x] Implemented custom React hooks for data fetching

### Phase 2: Core Features (Week 2-3) - COMPLETE ✅
- [x] Set up database with Prisma ORM and SQLite
- [x] Implement project management service layer
- [x] Implement task management service layer
- [x] Implement user management service layer
- [x] Create API routes for projects, tasks, and users with Zod validation
- [x] Enhance dashboard with project and task statistics
- [x] Create detailed project view page
- [x] Implement full task management functionality
- [x] Create detailed task view page
- [x] Implement user management functionality
- [x] Add commenting system
- [x] Build team collaboration features
- [x] Implement real-time notifications

### Phase 3: Advanced Features (Week 4) - COMPLETE ✅
- [x] Implement real-time updates with Socket.io
- [x] Add notification system
- [x] Create reporting and analytics
- [x] Optimize performance and SEO
- [x] Implement dark/light theme toggle

### Phase 4: Polish & Deployment (Week 5)
- [x] Conduct thorough testing with Zod validation
- [x] Fix bugs and improve UX
- [x] Write comprehensive documentation
- [x] Deploy to Vercel
- [x] Set up monitoring with Sentry and Logtail
- [x] Performance optimization and final QA
- [x] Finalize portfolio presentation materials

## Portfolio Presentation

### Key Highlights
1. **Full-Stack Development**: Showcases expertise in building scalable, maintainable web applications.
2. **Modern Tech Stack**: Utilizes cutting-edge technologies like Next.js 15, React 19, TypeScript, and Tailwind CSS.
3. **Responsive Design**: Mobile-first approach with adaptive layouts for all device sizes.
4. **Performance Optimized**: Implements best practices for loading speed and runtime performance.
5. **Clean Architecture**: Well-organized codebase following industry-standard patterns.

### Skills Demonstrated
- Next.js (App Router, API Routes, Server Components)
- TypeScript (Type safety, interfaces, Zod validation)
- Database design and ORM usage (Prisma)
- Authentication and authorization
- Real-time communication with Socket.io
- Responsive UI development with Shadcn UI
- Testing strategies
- Deployment and CI/CD with professional monitoring

## Future Enhancements
- Integration with third-party services (Slack, Google Calendar)
- Mobile app development with React Native
- Advanced reporting with data visualization
- AI-powered project insights and recommendations
- Multi-language support (i18n)
- Offline functionality with service workers

## Getting Started
```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone <repository-url>

# Install dependencies
npm install

# Set up environment variables
cp .env.example .env.local
# Update values in .env.local

# Run database migrations
npx prisma migrate dev

# Start the development server
npm run dev
```

Open [http://localhost:3000](http://localhost:3000) to view the application.

## Contributing
This project is primarily for portfolio demonstration. However, suggestions and feedback are welcome through GitHub issues.

## License
This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the LICENSE file for details.
